On Lazarus Saturday, the morning of the day they arrived, Maksim and The Ivanych spotted a brown speck moving on the ragged thinness of the horizon.

“What is happening out there, Maksim?” The Ivanych asked. Maksim took out his screen and zoomed in.

“The old bear ambled north,” Maksim suggested. His master considered this.

“That is a lazy metaphor,” the old man said.

But there it was nonetheless, already in its summer coat. The bear lumbered gamely through the mud, turning left or right every hundred meters or so to detour around the methane craters that pockmarked the land. On his screen Maksim watched it twitch an ear and shake its round head. The ticks and mosquitos must be following it, he thought. A walking bloodfeast as they, too, pushed northward into the thawed frontier.

“Still, it is a good bear,” The Ivanych then decided. “I hope it does not fall in a hole and die this year.”

Maksim and The Ivanych kept pace behind the bear all morning. When the sun was high in
the sky, they stopped by one of the crater ponds and filtered some water for their horses. Since the air was more than balmy now, they stripped down to their undershirts. Maksim rolled out a tarp on a patch of fresh grass, and they stayed for lunch. The Ivanych ate black bread and antelope jerky. Maksim had a stale pirozhok and polished off the last of the Japanese cricket pocky he had been saving since Yakutsk.

By the time they finished, the bear had disappeared over a hill, so they left it behind and lit out to the northeast, making up for their slow pace of the morning. The land was empty and brown, and it stank of gasses still lingering in the earth. Elsewhere on their journey over the Yadoma, they had seen plains of rainbow moss, prehistoric lichen blooms, and invasive groves of Chinese new-bamboo or American weed-oak, each buzzing with their swarms of autonomous cultivators. But here it was mostly mud, stretching out in all directions, unbroken by trees or roads or even any particularly notable rocks.

They stopped for tea next to a solitary artifact, deposited, no doubt, by some drone of decades past. The sign read: Free Land! Register Today with Ministry for the Development of the Russian Far East, Far Eastern Federal District, ul. Turgeneva, 68, Khabarovsk, Khabarovsk Krai.

“Should we take it down?” Maksim asked. At twenty, he had never known the majesty and danger of Russian bureaucracy, and an obsolete sign seemed to him a silly thing to leave sitting around.

“You are so fastidious about the landscape, Maksim,” The Ivanych commented. “But no, it is a good reminder. To claim this place one must travel two thousand kilometers to a government office, and then come back again. The motherland was as wise as she was generous, for only those who hated themselves enough to do such a thing were worthy of her gifts.”

***

Maksim and The Ivanych had been called by a Doukhobor commune deep in the thaw. Their destination was nestled in a cluster of orchards and fields that had been optimistically planted in the dank soil. They arrived at dusk, sore from days of hard riding. The commune, Feast of Passivity, was a jumble of big houses made of unstained lumber, chocolatey clay and quarried stone. Even so far from civilization, it was rare to see a new building that wasn’t quickfabbed. The Doukhobors had come to this place with empty hands, and built with what they found.

The commune leader’s deputy, Irina, met them at the edge of town.

“Welcome. We do not get many visitors,” she said, reluctant in her hospitality. “I suppose I should show you why you came.”

She wound them through multi-family dwellings to the village center. Tall men and women in hemp and flax linen clothing watched them pass from porches and lush gardens. Children peeked out, pressing their noses against kitchen windows. The village square featured a ring of huge, brick ovens, still glowing with red embers from the day’s baking.

Adjacent the ovens stood a grassy hill, man-made with soft, square edges—a pyramid with the top half lopped off. They tied up their horses and followed her, Maksim helping the old man up the slope to a domed greenhouse. Irina opened a lockless door, and damp, floral air rushed out. On the other side, under the dome, was a hole 20 meters wide. Maksim and The Ivanych stuck their heads through the door and peered down.

Maksim half expected it to be another crumbling methane crater, but no. It was a concrete shaft, at least fifteen stories deep. A metal ladder, stained with age, plunged to the floor, and grated platforms, folding up against the wall, spiraled down at regular intervals. Balanced in the center of the shaft, thin and lethal as a pike, stood a nuclear missile.

Maksim watched The Ivanych study the rocket solemnly, taking in its multistage boosters, its porcelain-smooth hull, its red and black warhead cone—so close Maksim thought he might be able to spit on it. After a moment The Ivanych turned to the deputy, eyes wet.

“What a wicked beast you have cornered,” he said. “I would like to help you kill it.”

***

The Doukhobors were Christians, pacifists, anarchists and vegans. For a century they set about systematically rejecting everything integral to Russian society: the church and its icons, the state and its military, the schools, the Bible, alcohol. When pushed by the Tsars to assimilate, their weapons of resistance were nude marches and arson. They were driven across the sea. Their leaders were assassinated, their children were stolen. But they were a patient people. They did not need much, just bread, salt and water. Toil and a peaceful life. They sustained, and the world changed. The church fractured, the grip of government loosened. The Doukhobors outlived their persecutors. And now, like so many of the outcasts of the past millennium, they saw an opportunity in the thaw.

After almost two centuries of exile in Canada, a thousand Doukhobors had slipped quietly across the Pacific and converged on a half-deserted government office in Khabarovsk. The clerks that remained there were ceremonial minders for one of the lonely computational intelligences that were the great, lingering legacy of the Russian state. When the Doukhobors politely demanded free passage to return to the Siberian frontier, there was no one left with the power to tell them no.

Still, they went through the motions. Travel documents were stamped and deeds were affirmed. They picked as their official homestead one hundred-hectares of craggy earth along the Lena River, just below the receding permafrost line. They traveled there together, a caravan headed towards a little promised land. But they were not the only thaw-settlers. The river valleys were filling up with farmers, trappers, prospectors, hermits and thugs. So the Doukhobors gave up on their parcel and struck into the vast wilderness, following a vision by their leader.

“In a dream Peter Vasilevich Verigin came to her and told her of this place,” Irina explained that first night. She was a mousy woman of forty, and she spoke Russian with a crisp Canadian accent. Like the right hands of charismatic leaders since the dawn of time, her attitude oscillated between protective and exasperated. “The great preacher had traveled here in his exile, and God had showed him what it would become. We were to take this pit of war, he said, and make of it an orchard. The soil itself would give us seeds, and our trees would grow rich with fruit that would feed us through the cataclysms, until only peace and summer remained. Then we would spread all across this land and become numerous.”

“I see,” The Ivanych said. Maksim could tell that for a great cynic like The Ivanych, this earnest mystical spiel was hard to swallow.

“I will admit, even in my faith, I was shocked when we found this place. The silo is just the beginning. There is a huge complex beneath us, many rooms: a barracks, laboratories, storage, a hangar where more missiles could be made. It was a great windfall, but I assumed it could not last. Surely someone must be watching this place, yes? Someone would notice us, and they would come to chase us away.” But Irina shook her head in wonder. “No. This place is forgotten. We even sent a boy to Moscow, to check archives. No records remain. Perhaps they were lost in ‘89, or in ‘41. Or perhaps they never kept records at all. Can you imagine such a thing? To build something so secret that you yourself forget it?”

“It is not so surprising,” The Ivanych said. “That is a very big missile. Bigger, I think, than even the R-36. To build such a thing takes great ego, a jealous mind. Its makers would have wanted it to be the most secret, as well as the most terrible.”

“Very big, yes. We wondered about that. But then in the complex we found maps and charts, and old computers designed to plot trajectories,” Irina continued. “The maps are of the moon.”

Even The Ivanych was a bit taken aback. The homey parlor where they were taking a late evening tea had a skylight, and the moon, waxing gibbous, spilled a milky light into the room. He looked up at it, through the streaked solar glass, then spread his thin arms in amazement. “A bomb to scorch the moon? Such folly. But then, it was an age of rumor, and much confusion, barely contained. Some general must have believed the Americans were building their own secret base up there, to rain moon rocks down on Moscow. Who knows? Perhaps they were.”

“Why do you call us now?” Maksim piped up. In his lessons The Ivanych had discussed patina and how to tell the age of a place, and so he had kept his eyes open as they walked around the village, noting the way the buildings had settled into the soft, unsteady earth. “You must have been here ten years, at least.”

“Ten, yes,” Irina said. “When we arrived, the silo was sealed by a great hatch. We did not have the tools then to cut it open, so we built our homes around the hill and prayed for revelation. Then one day some children playing in the woods found another hatch, much smaller. This was the back entrance. Once inside, we figured out how to open the silo, and we removed the hatch. We wanted to keep the missile there, as a reminder to our descendants of the frightening alternatives to peace, and use the shaft for our hydroponics, as our leader’s dream directed. But then…”

She stopped, pressed her lips together. The Ivanych leaned forward, into the mint glow of the algae lamp that stood on the small tea table between them. The lines in his face sharpened. Maksim thought he looked older than ever, and yet alert.

“Yes?”

“A boy got sick. Vomiting, bloody diarrhea, organ failure. Death. Radiation, we think. We do not know how. Maybe he climbed inside the rocket somehow, or handled the wrong thing somewhere else in the complex. We think there may be a leak, but we do not know how to find it, or what to do.”

“Pah!” The Ivanych said, sitting back again. “What did you think would happen? That you could leave this beast in the center of your garden, chained to a post, and no one would get hurt? Perhaps if you had left it sealed. But you have uncorked it, and now all manner of rot and vermin will be flooding in. Corroding it, chewing at wires. Even after ‘91, the old state spent a fortune maintaining its arsenal. These are delicate machines, harnessing physics even their makers only half understood. You are lucky it has not blown you to your heaven already.”

“We understand that now,” Irina sighed. “That is why you are here.”

The Ivanych threw back the last of his tea. Maksim quickly did the same.

“Then, to begin, I will need to search the monster’s cave.”

***

When the Doukhobors called The Ivanych, they had called two others as well. Individuals with unusual knowledge, circuit riders who could roam deep into the frontier. This was, The Ivanych noted, an increasingly common practice these days.

“The more satellites wink out, the more work for us. Eh, Maksim?”

The next day was Palm Sunday, and Maksim and The Ivanych were roused early by children cheerfully threatening to whip them with pussy willows and fuzzy, purple-tinted palm fronds. The rest of the commune was already up, baking fresh bread for the first of several feasts they would hold over the coming Holy Week. The tall Doukhobors gathered in circles to knead dough, joking and chatting in a mix of Russian and English. The village was bathed in the smell of yeast, cut by woodsmoke.

While they waited for the other sages to arrive, Maksim and The Ivanych set about exploring the Soviet complex. It was like many old places: impossibly sturdy in some ways, rotted beyond recognition in unexpected others. The Twentieth Century had built fearlessly, assuming that, unlike ages past, their works would always be well cared for.

The steel supports were still solid, but the concrete that made the walls and floors had distended and split in spots where moisture had crept in and the warming earth had shifted. Pipes and cables sagged from the ceiling where shoddy screws had disintegrated. The paint had curdled. Anything cloth was gone. There must have been very colorful molds growing on some of the furniture before the fastidious Doukhobors had cleaned the place out. In one corner sat a pyramid of plastic fuel barrels, which, while bright and orange as ever, had turned slimy to the touch. Seeing how Twentieth Century polymers aged was always an adventure.

Many rooms were claustrophobic, and tall Maksim had to stoop a bit to avoid feeling like he would hit his head on the light fixtures. He wondered aloud if people had been shorter when the complex had been designed.

“Do not be foolish, Maksim!” The Ivanych said, annoyed. “They set the ceiling to the exact minimum height that would be comfortable to the average soldier, and only later did they remember to add the lights. Utilitarian, they called their brutal style. Pah! Where is the utility in discomfort?”

Despite the decay and cramped design, the Doukhobors were hard at work transforming the complex into an underground farm and arboretum. The winters this far north were still harsh, and it was not hard to see what a valuable hedge such a facility could be for the vegan commune. They had taken to this project with an industry and ambition that seemed at odds with the rustic aesthetic of the village above.

In the cavernous hangar, they suspended from the ceiling multi-story assemblies of hydroponic and aeroponic crops, lit by sunlight piped in from the surface. They tore deep trenches into the floor and filled these with compost to nurse cuttings into fruit trees. In the dank barracks they repurposed rows of metal bedframes into racks for growing pale mushrooms and mycelium. Storerooms became a seedbank. Laboratories remained laboratories, but had been given new life parsing the genes of prehistoric flora awoken by the thaw.

“It is just as our leader prophesied,” the lab tech, Alyona, told them. She was tall and blue eyed, with gleaming chestnut hair spilling out from under her lacy headscarf. Maksim found himself standing up straighter despite the low ceiling. “In every soil sample our surveyors bring back, we find the spores and seeds of plants that haven’t been seen here in centuries. We coax these back to life, to find sequences that might strengthen our crops. The further north we look, the older the permafrost. I know it is impossible, but I dream of reviving the trees of the last great thermal maximum. What a gift from God it would be to eat a fruit that has not been tasted since before the Grande Coupure!”

“Yes, an incredible prediction,” The Ivanych grumbled. “Who could have known that ice would melt in a warming world?”

“But who else recognized the bounty to be found in our soil?” Alyona retorted gamely. “The fronds our children play with today—I made them, ancient fern genes spliced into palm seeds from Sochi. They grow so fast, and they make mulch for our citrus grove. This year we planted a new strain of arbequina tree that I believe could survive the winter outdoors. In five years we may be eating olives. Perhaps God warmed this place so that we might remake it in the image of his Holy Land?”

The Ivanych snorted.

“Does it worry you, working so close to the bomb?” Maksim put in quickly. “What with the boy who died, and everything?”

Alyona’s pretty face darkened, and she gave a small cough. “That was my sister’s boy. Luka. One of the first children born here. He was such a joy, but very precocious. Always exploring. He would bring me flowers he found out in the forest, or tufts of moss. Asked me if they were dinosaur food.”

Maksim cursed his choice of topics. He glanced at The Ivanych, expecting the old man to be smirking at his blunder. But no, his sharp eyes were on Alyona, listening.

“I used to take my lunch and sit in the silo, look up at the sky, and at the bomb. In my work, I think often of the great extinctions. It was...exciting to see another one, so narrowly avoided, personified right there in front of me.” She sighed. “I no longer go there, but out of grief, not worry. I have been down here for years without getting sick. This lab, it was made to build such bombs. There must be waste from that, hidden somewhere that Luka found.”

After this The Ivanych stalked through the halls, examining cracks and pressing his fingers into corners. He put his ear to the walls and listened as Maksim slapped, hard, on different spots. Perhaps there was was a secret room, a storage for nuclear materials that the previous occupants had walled off before they left.

“These people, they are very careless,” The Ivanych mused. “You saw how they keep the nuke. Under glass, not even locked. They bustle around. They rip up the floors. And yet, only the boy got sick. The only explanation is that he was exposed to something they have not encountered.”

It was a puzzle. And yet, the question of the beast remained.

***

The other sages arrived the following day, Holy Monday, and Irina convened them over lunch in a side-chamber of Feast of Passivity’s large singing hall. As always happens when singular men meet, there was a certain amount of sizing-up to do.

Oleg Sokoloff, Irina informed them, was an expert on rockets, the old kind that went straight up from the ground. Still in his thirties, Sokoloff wore a tan flight suit, an antique sewn with faded Roscosmos patches. It would have looked ridiculous, had he not, in fact, arrived by air. Maksim and The Ivanych had watched from the edge of town as Oleg set down his little solar glider aside one of the Doukhobors’ budding orchards. Then he jumped out of the cockpit and stretched on the grass with a calisthenic flourish.

“He is an enthusiast,” The Ivanych said disdainfully. “Watch this one for me, Maksim. Those planes are very hard to come by. We should be wary of such connections. This is a delicate situation, and we do not want outside complications. Plus,” The Ivanych scowled. “I do not trust a man who makes an entrance.”

The other arrived more quietly. In fact it was not clear to Maksim how the hooded figure had travelled to the commune. He brought no horse or car. He was simply there, first thing in the morning. To Maksim, this was much more suspicious than Oleg’s plane, but his master did not seem bothered.

Mikhail Morozov was his name, but the ‘Shaman of Chernobyl’ needed no introduction. Everyone in Eurasia knew his legend: the scientist-turned-mystic who was there in The Red Forest when the superstorm struck and the second sarcophagus was torn open, and who warned the cities downwind before turning to fight the radioactive fire with shovel and axe. He was old now—perhaps as old as The Ivanych—and he walked stooped by heavy robes. Maksim wondered if they were lined with lead.

“I am not surprised that is who they called,” The Ivanych confided to Maksim. “If the rumors are true, he has been abroad since the reclamation at Chernobyl. They say he seeks the wild places, to commune with plants and rocks, but I have heard of him traveling to the nuclear cities, and to Iran and India. I believe there is more to this man than the stories.”

The Doukhobors gathered the sages for a prayer, and then unveiled a hearty lunch of roasted parsnips, green salad and tart apple pie. The three men exchanged cagey pleasantries that left Maksim feeling a little bewildered. He tried to keep his confusion from showing, as Alyona was among those Doukhobor hosts serving the meal. As the others cleared away the dishes, she passed each of them a mug of hot lemon tea. She smiled at him, and he felt his stomach flutter.

Thus sated, they broached the topic of the missile.

“It is a beautiful craft!” Sokoloff exclaimed. He was indeed enthusiastic. “I have never seen its like! And the fuel! It is still there! I have been to many missile sites, and always the fuel has been taken. Rockets powerful enough to escape our gravity well were rare enough in the space age. Today no one builds such things. I will do some calculations, but I believe your guess about its destination is correct. It would indeed be big enough to deliver a very small parcel to the moon with great accuracy, if that is where you pointed it. Even from this northern latitude!”

“‘Parcel’ is quite the euphemism,” The Ivanych said quietly. Sokoloff glared at him.

“It is only the warhead that makes a missile into a weapon, esteemed Ivanynch,” he said, then he stood up to make his case, looking towards Irina. “I tell you, this rocket is not a problem. It is an opportunity! You want to get rid of it, fine. Let us shoot something to the stars! A message, maybe. Or a probe. I know people who could make such a thing. There are still those who do not fear the sky, who listen to the old probes, singing back from beyond the edge of the solar system. We do not send heroes into space anymore, but we could still make our mark in the cosmos!”

Sokoloff was pacing now, making sweeping gestures with his arms.

“Imagine it! A true blast off, right from the silo! None of this slinking, hopping from planes or balloons to fiddle with dead satellites, barely grazing the edge of space. Your people would be famous! Written into the stars alongside great names like Gagarin, Titov, Tereshkova, even the great martyr Padalka! You would show the world that even here, out on the frontier, Russians still reach for a greater destiny! Many would rally to such a cause, if only they were given an opportunity to believe!”

Sokoloff slapped the table, causing Maksim and Irina to start. His eyes glistened with passion.

“I ask you: do not do this for me, or for yourselves. Do it so that once again a young boy can dream of growing up to be a cosmonaut. Yes, we live in perilous times, but is that not why we need reason to hope? Should we not still seek meaning by reaching beyond our cradle? The rocket, it was meant to fly! Let it live, and through it we may all live!”

Silence descended over the group. Maksim was not sure what he had expected from the meeting of the sages, but Sokoloff’s rant was not it. He looked out the window, which opened onto the town square. The day was bright, and men and women stood gossiping together as they tended the ovens. Children ran around barefoot, so different from his own boyhood in smokey, stubborn Magnitogorsk, before he left home to join the Foragers. Behind the square was the silo hill, and Maksim tried to imagine a rocket exploding up from the middle of this placid scene.

The enthusiast sat down and waited for a response. Morozov cleared his throat and spoke.

“Do what you you want with the missile. It is the warhead that concerns me.” His voice was soft and wheezing. He reminded Maksim of that old video, The Godfather. “I have examined the schematics found in the complex. A tactical warhead. Not the biggest such device, but still very potent. And, if repurposed, a great resource.”

Morozov paused to let the others digest this startling pronouncement. Irina blinked three times, very fast. Sokoloff slouched back into his wooden chair and rubbed his chin. The Ivanych steepled his fingers and met the shaman’s calm, green eyes. Morozov continued.

“You have all heard the stories of the breach at Chernobyl. But do you know what brought me to the Exclusion Zone? I was there as an ecologist. It was a beautiful place. Everything green and full of life, even as death seeped into the soil and water. Trees took root, flowers bloomed, beasts multiplied. Despite mutations and deformities, the land flourished in a way seen only in the remotest of wilderness. How could this be, when we were told that even the air was poison? The answer is simple: there were no people. As soon as we fled, life rushed back in. In the absence of humans, the spirits of the land could stretch and grow. I realized in that place that we people are a much greater poison than any particle or isotope.”

“But sir!” Sokoloff protested. “With the many souls you saved, surely you are not a decimationist?”

“No, do not mistake me,” Morozov said, holding up a liver-spotted hand. “What I am is an urbanist. I value human lives, but I believe we are at our best when contained, when we do not spread out to trample upon the land. I seek a world where we stay in our cities, and leave the rest of the planet to regrow, as Chernobyl did. But how to provide for those cities without exploiting the rest of the planet?”

Morozov was settling into a rhythm now. Maksim suspected he had once been a university lecturer.

“Tokyo, Vienna, Curitiba, Shenzhen, Chattanooga, Seattle-Vancouver—all have made great strides in this effort. You see the impressive hydroponics our hosts have constructed. That is the way forward. But for truly dense cities, a problem remains. They do not have the landmass to meet their energy needs with the sun alone. Thus they have a choice: maintain sprawling solar farms outside the city, or turn to other sources of power. I have seen such farms, the fields of glass. They are entirely engineered landscapes. There is no room there for the wildness of nature, for the spirits to roam and breathe.

“After the reclamation, I found myself nursing a perverse perspective. I had seen the horrors of mankind’s nuclear meddling, and yet they did not scare me. They seemed, with patience and care, manageable. I studied, and I became convinced that nuclear power could now be harnessed safely. Much of the danger of the twentieth century methods came from slight errors in their old Standard Model. There are even techniques which can recast weaponized fuels for use in small reactors. America did this many decades ago. Now they continue this work in Isfahan and Hyderabad. We can do it here.”

The shaman turned to Irina.

“Perhaps your community here will remain small, but the frontier is filling up. Millions are coming to build cities on the three great rivers, and to the new northern ports. The spirits here, they fear this onslaught. I have spoken with them, as have the Yakuts and the Evenks. Let me take the warhead and gift power to the new peoples, so that their appetite for the land might be curbed, and the thaw may be allowed to bloom untrammeled.”

Irina adjusted her headscarf and looked around at the men. The silence was filled by a high hum of voices from the next room. A Doukhobor choir was warming up to practice for their Pascha concert.

“I will not pass judgement on your suggestions,” Irina said. “But, rockets launching from our town square, bringing nuclear power to the ports north. This is not why we came back to Russia. We are here to be left alone. Though perhaps that is not God’s plan.” She sighed, then set her eyes on The Ivanych. “Well, esteemed Ivanych, any other unorthodox agendas for our missile?”

The Ivanych swirled the dregs of his tea and stared down into his mug. It was a chipped antique that must have crossed the ocean wrapped in Doukhobor linens. On one side was a maroon V and “VANCOUVER MILLIONAIRES” in english capitals. On the other side was a maple leaf logo that read “Tim Horton’s 7th NHL Heritage Classic.” Outside the leaf, next to “7th,” someone had scratched the words “and final.”

“These are foolish plans,” The Ivanych said at last. “Each of you looks at the bomb and sees only what you wish to see. Do you forget? The beast is a hundred years old! Already it may be a killer, spewing radiation. And you want to light it up like some rotted Roman candle? We do not know if it would have flown even a century ago. We do not know if it was even finished!”

“The hull is immaculate!” Sokoloff protested. “We can examine its systems, test the fuel for purity. I know it will fly! I can feel it! There is no glory without danger. That is what made the cosmonauts heroes!”

“Pah! Your cosmonauts were all pretty-boy womanizers! What did they do? How much carbon did we burn, so they could float up there, sipping juice boxes? And for what? Some cosmist fantasy? No Russian ever left orbit. Only the dogs were heroes.

“And you!” The Ivanych rounded on Morozov. “You do not trust the frontiersmen here to walk the land, but you would trust them with this bomb? Because of animist voices in your head? The spirits you talk to here are dead! We killed them a hundred times, over five hundred years. We drove them from minds and hearths and out into the wastes to make their turquoise ice. And then we melted them. Boiled them out of the earth until only mud remained.”

Maksim had rarely seen his master so worked up. Sokoloff sat fuming. Morozov remained impassive, but seemed to sink back into the shadow of his hood.

“The missile, the bomb, these are terrible artifacts,” The Ivanych continued. “It is only by luck that they were found here by pacifists. Do you think that in the age of storms no one in the world holds a genocidal grudge? The Americans and the Chinese squabble as they spread their trees. Many Muslims cry out for a final Sunni-Shia war. The last of the Sea Peoples still prowl the northern seas. Even here in the thaw there are bandits with ambition and cults with apocalyptic dreams. Do you think none of them would like to hurl a rocket across the world, or hold a city hostage with a bomb? You forget your history, worldly men.”

“You should not be so harsh with your colleagues, esteemed Ivanych.”

An ancient lady had entered. Irina stood and offered her chair, and the small woman sat. Maksim realized that this must be the commune’s leader. For some reason he could not place, he had assumed that she was confined to bed or secluded in meditation. He was not the only one surprised by her sudden appearance. Morozov stared at her, looking startled and uneasy for the first time since his arrival.

“No matter what we decide, we will need their expertise.” The leader’s Russian was smooth, lacking the sharp cadence of the other Doukhobors’ bilingual Canadian accent. Her tone was warm and conciliatory, and she nodded at each of the sages in turn. “I hope I have not offended you with my eavesdropping. We are so grateful that you came so far to help us, but of course even here the world is complicated.”

“That is more of an obfuscation than an explanation,” Sokoloff said suspiciously.

Maksim agreed with Sokoloff. He glanced about the plain room, pondering where a microphone might be hidden. Perhaps in the rafters, or under the table. The Ivanych had taught him how to think about such things. A microphone could be very small, he knew. Invisible, even, if fabbed at nanoscale. Such devices were not as plentiful as they had been in his youth, but he had heard of new supply lines opening up in the south, feeding Korean and Chinese factory cities to produce a new wave of electronics, less powerful but sturdier even than his own little hand-me-down screen. These trickled out to trading posts and probably found their way to the northern ports. The Doukhobors were isolated, but based on what he had seen in Alyona’s laboratory, Maksim reasoned that they must still have access to many sophisticated resources.

“I second our enthusiast,” The Ivanych said. “Are you going to introduce yourself?”

“She is Iashnoviditsa, Our Dreamer,” Irina snapped. “Who gathered us from exile and led us home to plant new fields. You will treat her with respect while you wish to be our guests!”

But the old woman laid a hand gently on her deputy’s arm, and Irina quieted.

“Each of your analyses have merit,” the leader allowed. “But as Christians, we must choose the path towards greatest peace. And in this I believe The Ivanych is correct. There are warlords today who pine for the awful power of the bomb. It was a great deed, forty years ago, when the orthodox patriarchs and the Young Pope of the West seized the nuclear stockpiles before the disbanded could sell them off. Our world is safer for it. But now we meek come here to find that this great work is unfinished.”

Where Morozov talked like a professor, Iashnoviditsa had the rhythms of a preacher. And there was something else in her voice, too, Maksim thought, something that put him in mind of his years living with the Foragers, of nights in the field, divvying up produce. He could not put his finger on it.

“So. As beautiful as it would be to send a song into God’s vast sky, brother Oleg, or to help power our neighbors by the river, as our hero Mikhail suggested, we cannot risk letting the bomb leave here intact. I would ask you,” Iashnoviditsa smiled now, and Maksim felt some of the tension in the room evaporate. “Help us dismantle this missile. We fear what might happen if we are not careful, so we called you, who know the most about these artifacts. I would think that in doing so, each of you might gain knowledge useful to your ambitions. Will you...?”

But she trailed off. It took a moment for Maksim to realize what had distracted the old woman. The muffled singing that had been companion to their discussion since lunch had abruptly stopped, replaced by the clunks and scrapes of commotion.

She stood and strode to the door with surprising quickness. The others followed, Maksim helping The Ivanych out of his mycelium leather chair.

In the tall singing hall, the crowd of the choir was gathered around a bent figure: Alyona was coughing, convulsing with each ragged hack. She clutched her chest. Sweat poured down her brow, her headscarf askew.

Without thinking, Maksim rushed forward to help Alyona to the ground. She clutched him and for a moment caught her breath, her eyes wide and white with confusion. But then she swooned out of his grasp and crashed to the floor, unconscious. Maksim looked down at his hands. Small, red crescents of blood marked his palms where her nails had gripped him.

Iashnoviditsa was—quietly, forcefully—giving orders. Two men from the choir picked Alyona up and carried her from the hall. The other Doukhobors followed. The old woman turned to the sages.

“I fear our beast has brought more troubles,” she said. “Please, help us be rid of it.”

The Ivanych looked at Maksim for a moment, then nodded. Reluctantly Sokoloff saluted. Morozov too gave his assent, then said, “If you will not have me tame your ‘beast,’ how shall we dispose of it?”

***

In the end they decided on KBS-3, or at least an approximation. A Swedish method from the turn of the century, KBS-3 was designed for storing highly irradiated fuel, and thus would be overkill for the more stable plutonium-239 that the warhead likely contained. Radioactive material was to be locked in a matryoshka doll of iron and copper, drilled into solid rock and encased in concrete, in a cave or shaft hundreds of meters under the ground.

“Bury it deep enough,” The Ivanych said, “and it is like any other radioactive rock within the earth—harmless unless dug up...”

But this begged the question: how to prevent that digging up, perhaps for the tens of thousands of years it would take the plutonium to decay? In what Maksim felt was unusual foresight for the Twentieth Century, this issue had been taken up by groups such as the Human Interference Task Force, who had mused on the problem of marking the danger of a place to future people whose language and culture might be wholly unrecognizable. The Ivanych wryly ticked off their suggestions.

“Plant atomic flowers with warning details encoded into their DNA. Breed cats that change color in the presence of radiation. Establish an atomic priesthood to defend dangerous sites with myth and ritual. Pah! Farce, all of it. More useless fantasy from a generation that created problems with no solutions and solutions for problems that did not exist.”

“Then what do we do?” Maksim asked.

“Hide it deep, and pray the great age of mining is truly ending,” his master said. “The world builds with wood and stone now, more than metal or plastic. Materials that can last the ages. We have already ripped more out of the earth than we need. Let us hope we have learned to leave things in the ground, as the American hypocrites like to scold.”

All this they discussed the next day, Tuesday, as the Doukhobors and Morozov tended to the worsening Alyona.

“It is not radiation sickness, I am sure,” Morozov said upon returning to the group, his robes looking even heavier soaked by the morning rain. “Nor is it quite what the boy Luka suffered, if the Doukhobors’ recollection of his symptoms is correct. Perhaps Alyona could tell us more, as she was closest they had here to a real doctor. But she is feverish and delirious.”

After this Maksim and The Ivanych went for a walk. The rain had stopped after lunch, but the day stayed cool and cloudy, with a thin mist hanging around their feet. The commune was quieter than they had seen it before, almost ghostly. Perhaps it was the rain, but Maksim suspected it was the second illness that had dampened the Doukhobors’ mood. The Ivanych, too, was silent, and Maksim knew better than to pester his master when he was thinking.

Without the bustle of people, Maksim turned his attention to the town itself. He had been right about the patina of the place, but now he noticed that the Doukhobors’ homes had been built with a certain flexibility in their in structure. Hex-tiled foundations poked out at their corners, and the joints just below the solar roofs had an almost hinge-like shape. With the loss of permafrost in the thaw, the stability of the earth was no longer guaranteed. Many towns in the north had been abandoned when underground erosion had caused whole apartment complexes to slump sideways—or fall into sudden sinkholes. The Doukhobors must have faced similar conditions in Canada, Maksim supposed, and learned ways to make their buildings sturdier. The Canadians were very hip to that sort of thing.

Finally they came to the edge of the village proper, and the end of its gravel paths, and began to pick their way over puddles and slick grass towards the apple orchard. When they were out of earshot of the Doukhobor houses, The Ivanych spoke.

“Maksim, before you came to work for me, you were amongst the Foragers, yes? Tell me, did they pray before their meals?”

Maksim cocked his head. “A few did, I think. But it was not organized. Once or twice they would go off together to see a church, if we were close to a town.”

“So they knew each other, these devout Foragers?”

“Yes. I remember they joined together, near Abakan, when we stopped to turn over this huge plot near an old petrol refinery. The fumes had sunk into the soil, so it took a long time for the cultures to take. We ended up talking with some locals, and when we moved on a couple of them came with us.”

“And they were orthodox?”

“They liked to go to churches, anyways.”

“Religion is a mania that comes upon Russians in waves,” The Ivanych said. “It flows in and out of fashion as people grow tired of the explanations given for their troubles. It is a strange thing to see believers who have stayed so consistent for so long.”

“Maybe it is easier in Canada?” Maksim suggested.

“I do not doubt that many things are,” The Ivanych sighed. Then, “Tell me, Maksim, what do you think of our host, Iashnoviditsa? Was there anything familiar about her?”

“No. I do not know. What do you mean?”

“Humans are very bad at many things, but we are very good at recognizing patterns and familiarity, even when we do not realize it. I watched your face and saw such recognition. I want you to think about what might have struck you about her.”

Maksim frowned, wrinkled his brow. “You are right. Some of the older Foragers talked the way she does. The way she...brings everyone along. We used hand signals sometimes, to speed that up. And they were reassuring. You would get antsy or hungry, and they would calm you down, tell you how next time you passed through there would be berries to eat, rabbits to hunt. Reassuring.”

The Ivanych nodded, pleased. Then Maksim blurted, “Actually, she reminds me of you as well.”

His master looked at him sharply now. “Do not presume that we old people are all the same,” he snapped.

And with that, the line of discussion ended. The Ivanych moved on to the topic of Alyona’s mysterious illness.

“When I was young, this would have been easy, even in a remote place like this,” he said. “The old networks could have put us in touch with experts from around the world, great databases of knowledge, even algorithmic intelligences that would diagnose the most subtle medical conundrums in seconds. But of course, it did not last. Now, even if those systems were still up somewhere, and we tapped into some remaining satellite and somehow connected to them through the babel, we still could not be sure that the answers we heard back were not corrupted by botnet lies. There would be so much to fight through. Why we thought it would help us to salt that earth...I mourn every day, Maksim. I ache over what I helped do. It would probably be a permutation of one of my own learning malgorithms that would muddle us.”

They came to the orchard, and The Ivanych paused to pick a row of trees. Then he continued, quickening the pace of his small, old-man steps.

“So. Without such luxuries, and without a doctor to point us in the right direction, we must reason our way through many more options. Tell me, Maksim, what are we dealing with?”

Maksim had figured his master would want to talk this through with him, and so he had been working on an answer.

“Well, since we have ruled out radiation, it must be something biological.”

“I would not be so quick to rule out radiation in both cases,” The Ivanych said.

“Do you think the shaman is lying? Or wrong?”

“An interesting possibility.” The cynic scratched his nose. “I was merely referring to the fact that we do not know for sure that Alyona and Luka have been touched by the same affliction. Perhaps Luka did indeed stumble upon some nuclear waste, and his aunt’s illness is just a coincidence. But, let us consider your question. Is Morozov wrong? Always possible. But his fame comes from his expertise in leading the Chernobyl reclamation as much as from his actions the night of the breach. Thousands fell ill from the smoke and during the reclamation effort. If anyone knows the symptoms of radiation sickness, he does.”

“But he could still be lying, right?” Maksim said impatiently.

“What would his motivation be for such deceit?”

“Well, maybe he thinks that if the Doukhobors stop worrying about a leak, they will let him take the warhead to use in a reactor, like he wanted.”

“I can see your reasoning there, Maksim, and you are right that we cannot in good conscience dismiss this possibility. But I find it unlikely. Morozov’s position on the warhead is unexpected, but it is a considered one. A man of such consideration would understand that Iashnoviditsa has her reasons beyond fear of radiation. If Morozov were to show up at Siktyakh and offer to build a nuclear reactor, there would be many questions. The Doukhobors would be noticed, which I do not think Iashnoviditsa wants. The shaman must know she cannot be convinced. And, for what my layman’s opinion is worth, I agree with him. In my years I have never heard of radiation sickness causing what we saw in Alyona.”

“And Luka?”

“That is a trickier question. On the one hand, we cannot trust the Doukhobors’ apparently limited medical knowledge. On the other, while coincidences do happen, the family connection is a coincidence that stretches my credulity. Either way, we would be remiss if we did not at least explore possible links.”

“Maybe it is genetic?” Maksim said. “Some kind of hereditary illness that they both share, or something?”

The Ivanych chuckled. “Maksim, I always appreciate your imagination. However, it would be very unlikely for a genetic illness to manifest at almost the exact same time with different symptoms, a generation apart. What else?”

“Well, you said that Luka must have been exposed to something the rest of the Doukhobors have not encountered. So whatever that is, Alyona found it too.”

“Like what?”

“A virus? Bad food?”

“Poison?” The Ivanych said quietly. He stopped walking and examined the plump buds of an apple tree.

Maksim was taken aback. “Who could do such a thing to a young boy?”

“Do not be fooled by those who preach against the corrupting influence of the modern world, Maksim. Some killers really are born, not made. Every society has its share of sociopaths and sadists, even utopian communes. It would even explain the different symptoms, for such killers like to experiment with their methods to refine the thrill.”

All of a sudden the lengthening shadows of the trees seemed darker and deeper. Maksim looked around, hair prickling on his neck. But his master started walking again.

“Pah. Forgive an old man’s morbid fantasy. I doubt the Doukhobors have a monstrous serial poisoner in their ranks. Besides, there are so many others who could have perfectly human motives.”

“Motive? Like what?”

The Ivanych shrugged. “Family grudge. Jealousy. Revenge for some slight. All the usual reasons.”

“But Alyona is so sweet and beautiful!”

“And you think she does not have lovers whom she might have spurned?” The Ivanych looked at him pityingly. “In fact, this explanation is quite tidy. Imagine it. The boy dies, perhaps from radiation or some other unlucky affliction. Alyona is known to be close him, and to spend time near the bomb. We show up to lead the hunt for some radiation leak. It would be a perfect opportunity to poison Alyona and expect everyone to assume her sickness was related.”

Maksim tried to wrap his head around this alien line of thinking. He could see how all the pieces fit together, but the whole of such a plot felt like an artifact from some culture whose stories and symbols had been forgotten. He thought, not for the first time, how different The Ivanych’s media-soaked youth must have been from his own.

They reached the far edge of the orchard, and before them was the vast emptiness of the thaw. The sun had set while they were in the trees, and now they could see that the clouds had begun to clear as well. The moon shone dimly overhead, dropping its reflection into the many puddles left by the morning rain. A mosquito buzzed in Maksim’s ear. The night chill was late arriving, and he was glad of it, even though the warm air was thick with the telltale odor of rot—traces of sulfur which accompanied the methane that seeped steadily out of the ground.

The Ivanych had smelled it as well. “One wonders if it will ever truly be winter here again,” he said. “The weed-oaks, the new-bamboo, the great ocean machine the Japanese build...how can those feeble works compete with the scale of this place? With the endless eons of life and death folded into the earth here? There is no stopping it, now that these ghosts begin to float free. They cook the equator to a crisp. Eventually they will even cook us, in this place. Then perhaps we will become ghosts too. Or maybe not. Maybe just forgotten.”

Maksim did not know what to say. How could he? His life would stretch on, warmer every year. Whatever his master said, it did not feel like the end of the world while he was living it. They turned and began to trek back towards town in silence.

***

Wednesday morning work began on dismantling the missile. The resourceful Doukhobors had taken down the greenhouse and rigged up a pulley apparatus with which to extract from the silo shaft first the warhead cone, then the lower parts of the rocket. Sokoloff, who had spent much of the previous day sulking, now ran around energetically, shouting orders as they pried at the seams of the beast. A few times he grabbed ropes and gallantly dangled next to the missile to examine a tricky bolt himself. When they finally cracked into the hull of the rocket and lifted the nose cone up those first few inches, Sokoloff moaned and marveled with nervous ecstasy. Clearly he was having a grand time.

Once separated, the warhead cone was lifted out by the makeshift crane and set down in the green grass next to the silo, atop the weird pyramid hill. The Doukhobors and the sages gathered around to look at the beast in this fresh context. Detached from the vessel that would have carried it far away, the bomb seemed even more sinister—and yet, a bit comical, with its red and black stripes. This unlikely object would annihilate everything in sight, if primed by the right spurts of electricity. Perhaps how a passing thought could make one bolt upright out of a pleasant sleep, Maksim thought.

The Doukhobors, never ones to dwell on such things, wedged boards under the nuke and gingerly slid it down the hill, to be stored in a nearby barn. Then they got to work on the rocket.

Like everyone who worked on the built environment in the late twenty-first century, the Doukhobors were quick and efficient about dismantling and scavenging the wreckage of the previous two hundred years. Gone were the days when one could simply get on the phone and order up a two ton steel I-beam, to be delivered promptly from a factory 900 kilometers away. And gone were the days when, if one needed to remove an inconvenient structure, one simply knocked it apart with a wrecking ball or blew it to bits with plastic explosives.

By the forties, the globe had churned with great mass migrations. Billions fled droughts, floods and the collapse of supply lines. Most went to cities, and behind them they left a menagerie of strange artifacts: factories, barns, water towers, railways, pipelines, parking garages, gas stations, strip malls, power lines, irrigation equipment. For those who still roamed these cluttered landscapes, it became habit to build in and with these industrial age relics. Software was written to calculate the best way to take apart a cement truck or grain elevator to yield the most useful bits, and 3D printing made it easy to fab doohickies that would connect parts manufactured on different continents, in different decades. Maksim had done a good deal of this himself in his years with the Foragers.

And so the Doukhobors swarmed over the beast like ants stripping a carcass. It became apparent that the pacifists had been thinking for some time about how they would get rid of this terrifying moon-killer under their town. They mostly needed Morozov and Sokoloff to reassure them that specific cuts with a laser or blow torch would not accidentally trigger the bomb. It was taboo that the sages were there to dismantle, as much as the weapon itself.

Maksim was put to work on a team building scaffolding around the missile. They used new-bamboo, harvested from a grove that had sprung up a couple kilometers away. With their delicate orchards nearby, the Doukhobors had to be quick about spotting and uprooting such infestations before they attracted a drone and got really hard to manage. This latest grove had been caught after only a week, and yet the lengths Maksim was given to chop were as thick as his head.

Meanwhile The Ivanych spent the morning brooding. He prowled around Alyona’s empty laboratory and paced beneath the hanging hydroponic farm. Occasionally Morozov would come find him, and the two would consult on the best places to look for a mine shaft in which to deposit the warhead. But mostly he sat cross-legged in the silo and stared up the long pike of the missile, scowling as it was slowly engulfed in scaffolding.

Maksim was glad for the chance to do something with his hands that let him turn off the observing, critiquing, suspicious parts of his mind that The Ivanych was constantly prodding into alertness. Something that took his mind off Alyona. He joked with the Doukhobor men on his team. He practiced his English. Their Canadian upbringing had made them friendly and earnest, which was fine since, at his core, Maksim was too.

Every couple hours a group of children would bring them tea and a snack: fresh bread with apple butter, or carrots and hummus, or (Maksim’s favorite) potato and mushroom pirozhki. The Doukhobor men prayed each time, then cheerfully devoured their snacks in five minutes and immediately got back to work. “Toil and a peaceful life” was the Doukhobor motto, and they weren’t kidding about the toil. Maksim began missing his languorous days with the Foragers, or even life back in Magnitogorsk where any solid forty minutes of labor would be followed by a well-deserved nip of vodka or puff of Kazakhstani hash, perhaps a short lie-down. As the day dragged on, he found himself annoyed that these Canadian heretics were neglecting such a proud Russian tradition.

Eventually the sun began to get low, and Maksim stumbled back to the guest cottage he shared with The Ivanych. He was bone tired and his palms felt blistered and itchy from cutting bamboo all day. Inside his master was ironing their best suits.

“Clean yourself up,” The Ivanych said. “Tonight we are dining at the leader’s residence. I have questions for Iashnoviditsa.”

Unlike most of the Doukhobors—who shared their big, bustling houses with two or three other families—the dreamer lived alone in a cottage like their own. They knocked, heard a call, and opened the door to the warm smell of herbs and cooking vegetables. Her home was spartan compared to those of her followers. The furniture was plain, functional and uncluttered by trinkets. Only one piece stood out in the sitting room: a large bookshelf packed with ancient volumes, kept under glass. Maksim peered at them and saw titles not only in Russian and English, but also Chinese, French, and other languages he did not recognize.

Iashnoviditsa was in the kitchen, standing atop a step stool, stirring a thick stew with a big wooden spoon. These walls were covered with bunches of drying herbs and strings of tiny peppers. In the corner hummed a white refrigerator.

“Ah, yes,” the leader saw them looking at the appliance and pointed at it with her spoon. “Mostly we use underground refrigeration. Saves electricity. But my knees hurt sometimes, and I would rather not have to walk out to the yard every time I need something. So I got this old thing. What is the point of being in charge if you do not give yourself at least a couple little perks, eh?”

Her eyes danced a little, and she smiled, waving for them to sit at a small table. They sat, and The Ivanych showed off the sprightliness of his own knees by stacking his left leg horizontally on top of his right. He looked at her, waiting.

“So, you have come to interrogate me, yes?” Iashnoviditsa said, breaking the silence. She did not seem particularly perturbed by the notion. “Do not worry. Your reputation for a questing mind was why I asked you here. I have known men like you many times. I have come to realize that you lot are only as useful as you are obsessed.”

“I would say that I am only as useful as the information I have,” The Ivanych countered, a bit lamely, Maksim thought. “So, you will not keep secrets from me?”

“Keep secrets from you? Why, that implies that my secrets are somehow also your secrets, that I have stolen them away from you like a jealous divorcee keeping children from their father. On the contrary, if I have secrets, they are my own and nothing to do with you.” Iashnoviditsa stared witchily down into her stew.

“No one ever thinks their secrets have a life outside their mind. But all of history, indeed the very existence of the complex beneath us, is proof that this is usually wrong.”

“And yet, no one found this place for forty, perhaps a hundred years.” She gave them her disarming little smile. “Anyway, ask your questions.”

The Ivanych adjusted his waistcoat and cleared his throat. “The girl, Alyona, where did she get her training? She splices extinct genes, while the rest of your people seem content to be bakers and farmers.”

“Oh I would not dismiss farmers. Farmers have been playing with genetics in one way or another for ten thousand years. But to your question, yes, Alyona is extraordinary. Her parents saw this early on and sent her to study in Seattle-Vancouver. She could have found work in California, breeding the next generation of weed-oak. But I think she missed the Doukhobor life. So when her parents died some years ago, she came here, to us, to live with her sister. I am grateful that we have work worthy of her mind.”

“Does Alyona have any enemies?” The Ivanych pressed. “Anyone who envied her talents? Or a boyfriend or girlfriend who might have felt diminished by them?”

Iashnoviditsa frowned. “I do not think so. But then, no leader, even a leader of anarchists, knows everything that goes on. Quite the opposite, usually.”

She hopped down to pluck a shriveled pepper from the adjacent wall. She tossed it into her stew and continued.

“Do you remember the mug Alyona served your tea in, before she fell ill? That was her mug, a souvenir from her school days. You noticed the inscription, yes? Alyona is preoccupied by the changing climate, and that drives her into her work. I do not believe she makes time for romance. Maksim, come over here and taste this.”

Maksim blinked and walked over to sip from the old woman’s spoon. The stew was a little spicy, but otherwise it was a rich and classic mushroom shchi.

“Tasty!” he said.

“Ah, good! Let us eat, then. Hand me those bowls, would you please?”

He obeyed, and she carefully ladled out three steaming servings of the stew. She cut thick slices of Doukhobor bread and shooed Maksim back to the table. For a minute the three ate in silence. Then The Ivanych resumed his questioning.

“You are not Canadian, are you?”

“Ah, how did you figure it out? Was it my soup?”

The Ivanych cracked a rare smile. “Many things, but this meal confirmed it. It is wholly Russian. None of that Cascadian influence found in the rest of the cooking here. How did you come to lead these people?”

“That is too long a story for one bowl of shchi.”

“I do not trust long stories. Too often they turn out to be excuses more than explanations.”

“A wise man once told me, ‘do not try to be superior to those around you.’ He was a hypocrite, of course, but who is not? Everyone our age has a complicated provenance, I would say. Surely you yourself are no exception? I do not suppose ‘The Ivanych’ is your given name? How did you come by this title?”

“It is really more of a job description,” The Ivanych said.

“Ah, yes, ‘the cynic’ they call you,” Iashnoviditsa got out of her chair and walked into the other room. A moment later she returned, carrying a thick and faded book. She sat, sought for a page, and then read aloud: “‘I want to forgive. I want to embrace. I do not want more suffering. And if the sufferings of children go to swell the sum of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth, then I protest that the truth is not worth such a price.’” She leveled an inquisitive gaze at The Ivanych. “You know, it is funny. I never thought much of it before you arrived, but Ivan is not really a cynic, is he? In some ways, he is the most earnest character in the book.”

“Pah! Ivan was very young, never planned to live past thirty, and anyways went mad. If I am more cynical than he, it is because I lacked the discipline to ‘dash my cup’ forty years ago.”

Iashnoviditsa smiled at him. “I am not sure you are more cynical than young Ivan, my friend.”

The silence of a détente followed. Maksim sipped his soup as quietly as he could manage.

“And ‘Iashnoviditsa’? Is that a job as well?” The Ivanych said finally, tearing off a chunk of his bread.

“I suppose,” Iashnoviditsa replied. “It is Doukhobor tradition to rename their spiritual leaders. Occasionally the name still rings a bit strangely in my ears, but now it is the only one that makes any sense to me.” She shook head. “Maybe it was simpler once. Maybe it will be again. In the cacophony of the fresh millennium, who I was and where I came from felt so fluid I could barely keep track.”

“Well—” The Ivanych began. But he was interrupted. A crisp knock had sounded at the door.

The old woman went to the door and opened it. Irina stood there, white-faced. She began speaking low and fast. From their seats in the kitchen Maksim and The Ivanych strained their ears to hear.

“...Vera and Lidiya. One is coughing, the other vomiting. Lidiya also has black boils on her cheek. And Alyona is no better.”

Suddenly Maksim felt his master’s bony hand grip his wrist. “Show me your palm, Maksim,” The Ivanych ordered, eyes flashing. Bewildered, Maksim turned over his hands.

On one palm the blisters he had felt earlier had darkened and festered. Strangely they did not hurt much.

Irina and Iashnoviditsa joined them in the kitchen, and all stared down at Maksim’s hand with a morbid fascination. Then The Ivanych released his wrist and strode to the sink, where he vigorously washed his own hands. He plucked a dishcloth from a hanger and returned to the table.

“Wrap your hand in this,” he told Maksim. Then The Ivanych turned to the two Doukhobor leaders. “This Vera and Lidiya, did they know Alyona?”

“Vera has been caring for Alyona since Tuesday,” Irina said, glancing at the old woman. “And Lidiya helps Alyona out in the lab.”

The Ivanych nodded. “Take their clothes and things, and Alyona’s, and burn or boil them. Have those who do so wear gloves and masks, then boil those.” He looked around the kitchen. “Better do the same to whatever Maksim has touched as well, just to be safe.”

“Esteemed Ivanych, what do you know?” Iashnoviditsa asked, voice pleading and demanding at the same time.

“Know? Nothing for certain. But the confluence of symptoms has eliminated certain possibilities, and so we can suppose that there is a biological agent at work. Best to take precautions.”

“What agent? Tell us. Is it contagious?”

“I’m no doctor, but I have my guess,” he said. “I do not think it is very contagious, but there may be lingering contamination. We must be fastidious from now on. And we must move quietly. There is a chance this is not an accident, but an attack.”

“Attack?!” Irina was alarmed. “By whom?”

“Someone who wants the beast, perhaps?” Iashnoviditsa suggested. “Or the complex? Or our land?”

“Yes,” The Ivanych agreed. “Or else Alyona was herself the target.”

This brought new stares and questions from the two women, but The Ivanych held up a hand.

“Please, we know too little and have even less time. Tell me, do you have antibiotics here?”

Irina and Iashnoviditsa glanced at each other. “I do not believe so,” Irina said. “Why would we? We are an educated people. We know how to tend to our microbiomes. And anyway, they would not work.”

The Ivanych placed a hand on Maksim’s shoulder. “Then Maksim and I have an errand to run with the enthusiast.”

***

It took them a while to rouse Sokoloff and explain what they needed. Then it took yet more time for the enthusiast to prep his glider in the dark, fussing as he spread its balloon out over the still-muddy ground. And so it was well into the first hours of Maundy Thursday when they climbed into the three-seat cockpit.

“Try to stay still,” Sokoloff said, buckling the harness over his flight suit. “Balance is everything in this model, and I did not begin prepping the computer with wind data until half an hour ago. So it may get bumpy.” He glanced back at Maksim in a little mirror by his controls. “And please do not touch anything.”

Then they were off. Heating coils and fans blew warm air into the silvery canopy, which began to plump. Soon it floated above them, huge, blotting out the night sky. A few minutes later, without warning, the little plane shifted, and they rose gently into the air.

Up and up they went. Maksim had never flown before. He discovered at once that he was delighted. The cockpit was almost silent, but for a slight whistling of the wind. He craned his neck to look down at the Doukhobor fields and orchards, and the gaping methane craters shrinking to the size of puddles.

“We all weigh more than the Japanese engineers were used to, so we will have to go extra high to get enough speed,” Sokoloff explained, a note of daredevil’s glee in his voice.

Feast of Passivity was tiny now, and the thaw stretched into the distance, a once-dead land, now starting to stir and bloom. A ghost land, Maksim thought, revealed by the spectral light of the almost full moon.

“It is different, yes? Seeing the world from high above,” Sokoloff said from the front. “They say the cosmonauts experienced enlightenment when they saw the whole earth below them. Titov called spaceflight a drug.” He turned and grinned back at them. “Did you know that Vostok 6 was misprogrammed, and would have flown out of orbit had Tereshkova not noticed the error? What a coup that would have been! A god’s death, hurtling into the stars!”

Then Sokoloff said, “Get ready!” Maksim felt the harness over his chest tighten, and then the balloon above them ripped open. They plunged. In seconds the plane reeled in the flapping canopy and turned its nose towards the ground, becoming a bird of prey diving for the kill. Maksim’s stomach flipped, and his knuckles went white as he gripped the armrests. Behind him he heard The Ivanych cursing, while in the front Sokoloff was whooping with mad exaltation. Then the rush of the wind drowned them both out, and Maksim could not take his eyes off the ground: the great hand of God, swinging up to crush them like a too-slow mosquito.

Then they were crushed into their seats, breath forced out of their lungs, as the horizon drifted back into view. The pressure eased, and suddenly they were flying, Sokoloff’s computer making the featherlight wings of the glider ripple over the air with all the subtlety of a bird.

“With luck, the sun will be up by the time we need the motors,” Sokoloff said. “And with good winds, we should have enough in the batteries to get us near Nordvik in a single glide.”

And so they flew through the night, Maksim alternatively gazing down at the painted land below and dozing, lulled to sleep by stillness and the hum of the wind. He dreamed of the beast, shooting up past them, toward that hurtling hand of God he had imagined. The missile struck the enormous palm, and he realized it was his own hand, with a black welt where the weapon had exploded. Then he was jolted awake by the glider touching down, bouncing and skidding over a scrubby field.

Nordvik was a boomtown built atop the ruins of a Soviet penal colony and salt mine, on rugged land where dinosaurs were buried. Here barges floating down the gushing Khatanga and Anabar Rivers met with nimble solar skimmers that dodged icebergs to connect the verdant Siberian frontier with western Russia and northern Europe—and, when the arctic ice cleared in the summer, with the growing Continuity cities in Alaska, Canada and Greenland.

Sokoloff folded up his plane’s wings and dragged the craft into a grove of weed-oaks, covering it with a foil-thin tarp to keep the drones from picking at it while they were gone. Then, as the sun rose, the three of them hiked to a nearby road and caught a ride in a share-taxi headed into town.

Maksim had never been to a northern port before, but he had heard stories. Rough places built fast on unstable ground. Nordvik was a first stop for settlers heading for the unclaimed soil of the thaw, sometimes carrying little more than a quickfab kit and a package of seedbank clones. It was also a last stop for exiles and runaways, folks chased to the end of the earth by the sloshing churn of authorities, bureaucracies, flaring and failing markets, refugee migrations, militias, cults and pogroms that formed the patchwork political-economy of Central Asia. Folks, he supposed, like himself.

The car picked its way down a road of uneven glass panels, past big, boxy warehouses where farm equipment was being assembled and industrial-sized printers turned out rolls of solar for the new settlers. They were alone at first, but as the city got denser other passengers piled in. Soon they were wedged together, hips staggered, knees a-jumble. Maksim scratched nervously at his cloth-bandaged hand. The Ivanych scowled at him from across the car.

They came to stop in a square of beige, quickfabbed buildings, walls snapped together at jaunty angles in the Finnish style. Everyone tumbled out, tossing an exotic menagerie of coins into the taxi’s tip jar. Sokoloff, who had visited once before, helped them get their bearings, and the three of them followed the etched-glass road signs towards Nordvik’s Old Town.

Anticipating the trade possibilities of an ice-free Arctic Ocean, the north coast had been resettled in the thirties by decree of a state computational intelligence. In an act of defiant irony, the bitter souls drafted for this task had built their colony on the curving peninsula where, a century before, forced laborers had scraped at the frozen earth to supply salt for the far eastern fisheries vital to the war effort. When the thaw came, the city grew in earnest, sprawling around Nordvik Harbor. Erosion had sent much of the peninsula crumbling into the rising sea, but on that barren jetty Old Town doggedly remained.

After the pastoral primness of Feast of Passivity, Nordvik felt pleasantly familiar to Maksim: grimy, crowded, smelling of horse shit, burnt earth and greasy food. It was colder here, too; a chill wind blew down off the spring meltwater coursing through the harbor. As they approached Old Town the streets narrowed to alleys where cafe windows offered spiked coffee and fish breakfast. Men stood in clumps, vaping and passing bottles, scanning the passersby for benefactors or marks. The beige quickfabs turned to dark concrete and exposed rebar. Here and there braids of cables snaked up a drainpipe or spilled off a roof to swoop into third floor windows. The Ivanych strode ahead, eyes raised, examining the facades.

“This one,” he said, stopping at a shabby townhouse next to a brick Orthodox church.

“Are you sure?” Sokoloff asked, eying the door doubtfully. “I got a very good deal from a man at the docks some years ago. Let me try to find him, yes?”

“I am sure,” The Ivanych said, and pointed up. The top of this building bristled with rusty antennas and dented satellite dishes. “To find what I need, I must go through the Mephi Vactor. There is not much of it left, but if its minders keep a terminal anywhere in the north, I suspect it is here.”

He reached out and rapped on the door. There was a pause, and then a voice crackled through a speaker. “Yes?”

“I have credit in good standing with your master,” The Ivanych said, and then he offered a name Maksim had never heard before. “Villem Maslennikov.”

There was another pause, then a lock clicked. As he opened the door, The Ivanych gave Maksim a worried look. “Come, we have no time to waste.” Maksim shivered.

Inside they climbed some stairs and pushed through another, thicker door. On the other side was a jungle, hot, humid and glowing with the light of many screens. Racks of servers spiraled around the room, and on top of these were stacked trays of succulents and planters overflowing with green leaves. Creeper vines covered the floor, intermingling with computer cables. In the heart of the room was a worktable where colorful goggles, haptic gloves, and even antique smartphones lay strewn amidst Venus flytraps in tiny pots.

The minder was a young Uyghur man in a square hat, who sat in an easy chair watching an old Bollywood music video. He looked them over as they picked their way through the foliage.

“You are the Estonian, eh? We did not think you were still in the world,” he said to The Ivanych. “Who are these two? New red hats to lead into battle?” Sokoloff and Maksim exchanged a confused look.

“Pah! That is ancient nonsense,” The Ivanych snapped. “I will treat with the Vactor, my boy, not you.”

The Uyghur smirked. “Mephi Vactor speaks through me here. She and I are very intimate.”

The Ivanych raised his gray eyebrows. “She, is it? Is that the Vactor’s current eccentricity? Or perhaps just a presentation for your benefit.”

“She has gone through many iterations,” the Uyghur hedged, shifting in his plush seat. Then he smiled, as if pleased by his own joke. “She surrounds herself with flora now. Watches them grow. Watches the new ones spread across the planet like never before. We find that much more rewarding than fauna. Fauna are so inconsistent. You should know, yes? She tells me all about you.”

“Then she admits I am owed a favor, yes? I simply want to visit the old nets. I have a...medical query.”

“So go ask China or Japan, or those smug shits at Continuity.”

“I am asking the Vactor.”

The young man got up from his chair and walked to a cabinet. He took out a black jar and returned to the worktable.

“Villem, you are so old. What could you be up to?” He unscrewed the lid and probed the jar with a long-handled spoon. The end came out writhing with black dots. He tapped the spoon over one of the Venus flytraps, and ants spilled into the green maw. “Are you dying now? Perhaps hoping she has the secrets to eternal life? She is younger than you, you know. You insult her when you presume immortality. She has too much humanity for that.”

“I can find what I need myself,” The Ivanych pressed. “I just need the Vactor to sift through the noise. A small thing, really. If it prefers, I can return for my favor with something harder. Or perhaps I should go to Continuity. They would be interested in knowing about this place.”

They stared each other down now, the old man and the young Uyghur. And through the boy’s eyes stared something else, Maksim knew, something alien. In the silence the heat of the machines seemed to grow more suffocating.

Then the Uyghur looked away. “Fine,” he said, and to their left a screen flashed to life. The Ivanych sat at the worn wooden keyboard and went to work.

In the two years Maksim had worked and studied with The Ivanych, he had never actually seen his master use a computer. When something came up, they had used the screen Maksim’s uncle had given him. But now the old man’s fingers flew over the keys. He gazed into the glow as it flickered with rectangles. Occasionally The Ivanych would curse and mutter, in dialogue with the computational intelligence guiding him through the babel. Maksim tried to follow along, but the text on the screen switched between Russian and English too quickly for him to keep up.

After half an hour, The Ivanych got tired of Maksim’s lurking and told them to go find breakfast. Maksim and Sokoloff wandered Old Town until they came upon a Yakut woman dishing out hot wheat porridge and manning an ancient espresso machine. When they returned, carrying bowls wrapped in reindeer hide, The Ivanych was scribbling on a scrap of paper.

“Pah! Always we are a cursed people,” he complained, but there was a glint of triumph in his eyes. He handed Maksim the paper. “Quickly, Maksim. Take this to a probiotist. With luck, they will have what we need. With more luck, the illness will be archaic enough for this to work. I will be done by the time you get back. The Vactor and I have one more question to look into.”

Maksim looked at the paper, but he did not recognize the long, jumbled word his master had written. Still, he folded it up and set the old man’s breakfast on a table. Again he and Sokoloff left the server-warm greenhouse.

They found the probiotist by the water, in what must have once been a pharmacy when Nordvik first began to populate. Now it was filled with murky jars and the dank smell of fermentation. When they handed over the paper, the probiotist gave them a quizzical look. Then she shrugged and disappeared into the back. She returned carrying a bottle of pills, a tube of paste and a small vial of clear liquid.

“What kind of animals do you have?” she asked. Maksim did not know what to say, so he just took all three.

When they got back, the church next door to the Vactor’s lair had finished its Maundy Thursday service and was spilling believers onto the little street. Bells rang as they tromped up the stairs. The Uyghur scowled at them as they pushed into the room of screens. With a palpable reluctance, The Ivanych tore himself away from the terminal where he had communed with the Vactor and the old net.

He examined the items from the probiotist, then instructed Maksim to unwrap his hand. Sokoloff and the minder both recoiled at the sight of the black sore. The Ivanych opened the tube and squeezed out a dollop of milky cream onto the sore. He had Maksim rub it over his hands, then swallow one of the thumbnail-sized pills.

“Antibiotics were always an inexact science,” The Ivanych said. “That was their folly. If one must be artful, let it not be with poisons, eh? Now we wait to see if my suspicion is right. And perhaps find out who is to blame for all this grief.”

Then they fled the unnerving scrutiny of the Vactor and her minder, and made their way out of Nordvik. By the time they got back to the plane, Maksim’s stomach was churning, and his head felt woozy. When the glider made its dive, he nearly lost his porridge, but by a miracle he kept it down. They rushed through the sky, propellers speeding them ahead as the glider soaked up the afternoon sun. At some point Maksim’s nausea gave way to exhaustion, and he slept, dreaming again of the beast.

***

Maksim awoke late in the morning on Good Friday. Sun was streaming onto his face through stained-glass solar windows sparkling with the gold filaments of circuitry. He was not in the guest cottage. Leaf pressings and pages from 1970s botany textbooks were artfully framed on the walls. A green hoodie hung from a hook next to the door. He felt weak, and his stomach hollow, but he realized too that his palm did not itch anymore.

He got up and found his pants folded on a chair. His shirt was gone, so he pulled on the green hoodie. On the back were the words “UBCC FARMHAND” in english capitals; on the front was a seal with a gold sun on blue waves that said “University of British Columbia and Cascadia.”

He padded through the unfamiliar home to the kitchen. The Ivanych was there sipping tea from the Vancouver Millionaires mug.

“Good, you are up,” his master said. “We brought you to Alyona’s home, where the Doukhobors have been caring for her and the other two who fell ill. Now, let us see your black spot.”

Gingerly Maksim unwound the wrappings on his hand. The sore was still there, but it had shrunk and lost its putrid sheen.

“What is it?” Maksim asked. The old man looked at him, weighing his words.

“Anthrax,” The Ivanych said at last. “A bacteria, and a weapon. Its spores are resilient and versatile. If inhaled, it attacks the lungs, as it did with Alyona. If ingested, it eats a hole in the digestive tract, as it did to Luka. If it finds a wound on the skin, it creates a black boil and begins to poison the blood. Very deadly, but treatable with antibiotics—as so few ailments are now. We are lucky that whatever strain has been unleashed is old, and does not have modern resistance.”

“So my hand will be alright? And Alyona too?”

“There may be a scar, but with continued treatment the infection will subside, I hope. Here, apply more.” The Ivanych handed Maksim the tube of antibiotic cream. “Vera and Lidiya also seem to be recovering.”

“And Alyona?” Maksim could tell when his master was evading.

“Anthrax in the lungs is the most deadly. It must be treated very quickly,” The Ivanych said, looking into his mug. “Instead, we spent days thinking she might have radiation poisoning and wondering if it was all a coincidence. Still, the medicine you fetched is especially potent. It was the last line of antibiotics developed before the medical community gave up on them. And Alyona is young and healthy. It is a game of odds now.”

Maksim rubbed the cream on his hand as he pondered this dark news. Then his master slid him another huge pill, and told him to sit while The Ivanych made breakfast. Maksim could not remember The Ivanych ever cooking for him before.

“You said this might have been an attack?” Maksim asked later, as he ate Doukhobor bread and blackberry jam.

“One hundred years ago,” The Ivanych said, “The Soviet state, against international convention, pursued a secret biological weapons program, ‘Biopreparat.’ Hidden labs weaponized the greatest horrors humankind had ever faced: smallpox, ebola, anthrax, bubonic plague. They were to be loaded onto missiles and shot at American cities—a way to destroy the West without ushering in a nuclear winter.

“In 1979 there was an outbreak of anthrax in a town called Sverdlovsk, where one of these military labs was. A hundred workers from a nearby factory died. It was covered up, blamed on a dog, and on tainted meat. But the West found out, and after 1991 the program was shut down. Or, at least, it scuttled away into the shadows. Seeing the scale of the missile complex below us, forgotten for so long, is it so hard to imagine that a relic of Biopreparat also lies buried somewhere in far Siberia?”

The Ivanych got out of his chair and began to pace around the little kitchen.

“Perhaps someone found such a complex, and now wishes to capture the Doukhobors’ complex as well. But if so, why such a small outbreak? Or perhaps this is assassination. The Americans must know of Alyona’s talents, yes? Maybe the Chinese do as well. To have a rogue gene splicer digging up ancient seeds to make trees for some anarchist cult—you can see why they would not want such a complication in the world! But then why infect the young boy, first?” The Ivanych slumped back into the chair and glared at his mug of cold tea. “Pah! I have solved the medical riddle, only to be left with more speculation, going nowhere.”

Maksim chewed his bread in silence. His stomach gurgled, and he fought down an urge to run to the bathroom. He could almost feel the antibiotic pill tearing through his gut flora. But, he thought, it was a small price to pay for clean blood and a clean hand...

“What if we talk to Alyona?” he asked suddenly. The Ivanych shot him an indecipherable look.

“What do you think she might know?”

“You said anthrax is not contagious. One must be exposed to the spores, right?” Maksim said, piecing his thoughts together. “My hand got infected right where she dug her nails into my palm, which means the spores must have been under her fingernails. But what kind of assassination attempt would get spores under her fingernails? So maybe it makes more sense that she was exposed from something she handled herself?”

The Ivanych stared at him for a moment, then cracked a rare, toothy grin.

“My boy, you will never be a great cynic, but I think your mind may be of good use yet!”

Alyona had lapsed into fits of breathless coughing whenever she woke up, so the Doukhobors were keeping her sedated. With some cajoling, they convinced Irina to suspend the IV drip. They waited by Alyona’s bedside. The Ivanych leafed through the small stack of english-language books kept under the nightstand. Maksim fidgeted, unable to take his eyes off the still face of the pretty woman whose touch had almost killed him.

When she woke, Alyona did indeed start coughing. The Ivanych pulled a chair to her bedside while she mastered the fit.

“Take your time, my dear,” he said, sitting. “We will listen when you are ready.”

After a minute the coughing subsided, and Alyona looked at them with wild eyes, her chest rising and falling with each quick, shallow breath. Maksim thought he saw some of the same delirium that had been on her face when she collapsed on Monday.

“You have been ill for some days,” The Ivanych said. “Anthrax, not radiation, as it turns out. A rare and unlucky affliction. We wish to know what you saw, where you went, what happened in the days after Luka’s death.”

Alyona closed her eyes and her breathing slowed a bit. Then she spoke. “Luka, he brought me flowers. I followed them, out past the orchard. Along the edge of the forest, a big hole...there is a cave.”

“A cave?”

But that brief speech was too much for her, and the coughing returned, harder. Maksim could tell she was trying to get her breath to speak again, but it would not come. When the hacking did not subside, the Doukhobor nurses rushed in and restarted the IV. Alyona slumped back, unconscious.

“So are we going to go look for it?” Maksim asked, after they had been shooed out of the house.

“Of course!” The Ivanych replied. “But first, we will need to take precautions. We shall not make Alyona’s mistake again.”

First they went to Sokoloff, to see if, by chance, he had any spacesuits he could lend them; he was an enthusiast for those artifacts, after all. Unfortunately there was not room for much luggage in his tiny plane.

Next they asked Irina, who was curious and skeptical about their expedition. She took them down into the complex to look through the odds and ends the Doukhobors had found intact when they first breached the silo. There were indeed a few hazmat suits, but the decades had rotted them to shreds.

Finally they sought out Morozov. The shaman listened to their request and then left without a word. He returned a few minutes later with two packages the size of grapefruits. With a little teasing, these unfolded legs and arms and an airtight cowl, all made of an impossibly light, annoyingly crinkly foil.

“You are sure these will keep out the spores?” Maksim asked, gingerly stepping into the suit and securing the clear facemask and air filter over his face.

“Yes,” Morozov said, and left it at that.

Night had fallen by the time they left the village. They had no protection for their horses, so they went out on foot. It piqued Maksim’s paranoia, walking through the orchards in those suits. He felt alone with the claustrophobic sound of his own breathing. Even though they were safer, the world seemed more sinister.

The moon was full now, a perfect, creamy disk traversing across the clear sky. With its familiar features drawn so sharply, it did not look that far away. Had no one really set foot on the moon in over a century? But then, when he was a child, those Californians had said they had been to Mars, Maksim remembered. All those cosmic ambitions seemed so misshapen, he did not know what to believe. Maybe, Maksim thought, humans had never left the planet at all.

The bright moonlight cast crisp and twisted shadows through the apple trees, and Maksim was glad when they passed out of the orchard. The wastes stretched out before them, and to their left lay the painted darkness of real forest. They headed towards the woods and followed the treeline up the ridge of a wide, low hill. In his mask and the strange coloration of the moonlight, he could not identify the trees. Weed-oaks? Or something older? Instead he kept his eyes on the ground ahead, watching his step. The edge of the forest was dotted with odd little blossoms, popping with sudden color when they caught the light.

At the top of the hill they stopped to catch their breath, and it was then that they saw it. A hole in the trees, where the hill and everything on it simply vanished into shadow. They sipped from their canteens and trudged on a couple hundred meters. Then they entered the woods.

Inside the darkness was profound. They shone little algae torches, and Maksim supported his master as they picked their way over roots and logs, around squat bushes and dense shapes they could not make out. There was no path, but they had a compass to help them keep their bearing. Maksim wondered if Luka had had a compass. He imagined the boy exploring the woods on a warm spring day, climbing the trees to look for bird nests and searching the ground for new plants to show his aunt.

They walked for a while, and Maksim started to think that they had miscalculated and overshot their destination. But then they were in the bright moonlight again, and suddenly the ground before them fell away. The Ivanych had to grab the back of Maksim’s suit to stop him from tumbling over the ledge.

The methane crater was one of the biggest Maksim had ever seen: half a kilometer across and gouging deep into the hill. It must have been new, for he could see the fallen trees in the bottom of the hole, scattered like toothpicks by the unstable earth. In his suit Maksim could not smell, but somehow he just knew that it stank.

On the north end, the side of the crater had collapsed, creating a ramp of spilled dirt. It was so easy, how could young Luka resist? They circled the crater and climbed down the ramp. Maksim caught himself looking for footprints, even though he knew the rains on Tuesday would have washed them away.

The bottom of the crater was already filled ankle-deep with water. They slogged through the mud toward the far wall. Maksim did not know what to expect. Some kind of door? A tunnel to another secret complex? The remnants of a secret bioweapons test?

They found a gash in the cliff face, barely wide enough for them to squeeze into sideways. Maksim went first, shuffling, testing the floor. After a few meters it opened up a bit, and he waved The Ivanych in with his torch. The passage delved down into the hill through caked rock and clay. From the way it dripped, Maksim did not think the opening would stay stable much longer.

Down the tunnel and into the cave, a real cave, and bigger than Maksim would have guessed. Their lights were not strong enough to show the whole cavern, but it felt featureless, no glittering crystals or huge stalactites. It had probably been covered in ice once, a rocky bubble in the permafrost, now popping with the thaw.

“If these caves are common here,” The Ivanych said, breaking the silence, “that could explain why the Soviets chose this land for their complex. Save themselves some digging.”

But this place, they could tell, was no hidden bunker. It was just a dank anomaly in the earth. They walked the perimeter. Other tunnels had once led out of the cavern, but these had fallen in, leaving rubble-strewn crannies in the wall.

They noticed the fungi first. Oversized white tendrils coated a patch of floor and crawled up one wall. There was something alien about them. Were they prehistoric? There was lichen too on this side, bright red, and another kind of fungi that grew in pale, fleshy folds half a meter wide, like the wrinkles of an elderly giant. And in the center of this swirl of life sat a pile of black rot.

The Ivanych approached the carcass. There was no telling how old it was—not fresh, but more than a skeleton. Maksim followed his master, heart pounding. A few steps closer and he noticed the head, skull half exposed: wide, but pointed like a dog’s. A row of wicked, killing teeth snarled in his torchlight.

“Do you see it, Maksim?” The Ivanych asked, transfixed by the dead mass, just as when they had first seen the missile. “The whole sad story?”

Maksim did not answer. He was thinking about the day they arrived at Feast of Passivity, watching that brown speck in the distance, twitching with the bites of ticks and flies.

“A bear gets sick and wanders into a cave to die,” The Ivanych continued. “By chance it is frozen, locked in the permafrost, until the thaw creeps north. The ice melts, the spores reawaken. The boy and his aunt both stumble in, ignorant of the danger in the soil. How unlucky.”

Maksim could see it. In a way this story was so much simpler than The Ivanych’s wild theories of poisoners and secret labs. But something about it turned his stomach, made him want to look away.

“So everything that happened, it was no one’s fault?” he asked his master.

“I would not say that, Maksim,” The Ivanych said. “I would not say that at all.”

***

Saturday was The Great Sabbath. The Doukhobors baked honeycakes to share after the evening worship—the one instance in which they were flexible with their veganism. Maybe he was just in a bad mood, but Maksim felt like gagging from the warm, sickly sweet smell enveloping the village.

All through Thursday and Friday the Doukhobors had been hard at work dismantling the rest of their missile. Maksim and The Ivanych went after lunch to see the progress and got there just in time to watch the crane lift the black rocket nozzle out of the silo. There was a small patter of applause. The top of the pyramid hill was now littered with cylindrical segments of the beast, which were lovingly examined by Sokoloff. Soon individual parts would find their way into tractors, planters, plumbing and other jugaad contraptions.

At Morozov’s direction the warhead in the barn had been extracted from the nose cone and stripped of its electronic trigger mechanisms. The Doukhobors had sophisticated printers and had fashioned an impressive approximation of the KBS-3 casket. All that was left was to load it onto a wagon and carry it by tractor to abandoned Norilsk, braving the chemical disaster there to hide the bomb in a tapped-out mine shaft. Hopefully, Maksim thought, these mines would have no anthrax bears.

As Maksim and The Ivanych walked through the commune that day, villagers stopped their work to smile and thank them. Lidiya and Vera were up and about thanks to the antibiotics they had fetched, and even Alyona seemed to be on the mend. Luka would be the sole victim of the outbreak.

After sundown the whole community gathered in the singing hall to celebrate Pascha. It was a hushed and somber event; they covered the algae lights with black cloth and whispered prayers in the darkness. Then they lit candles and broke into song, declaring “Christ is risen! Christ is here!” Finally they exchanged gifts of seeds, to plant in their window boxes, and then shuffled outside for a late night feast in the town square.

Maksim and The Ivanych, as well as the other sages, were given places of honor at Iashnoviditsa’s table. Irina was there too, as were Vera and Lidiya—middle aged women who each looked drained but happy—and their families. Lidiya still had bandages covering the shrinking boils on her face. Finally they were joined by Luka’s parents and Alyona, pushed to the long table in a wheelchair. Alyona was gaunt and pale, but she could breathe with only occasional coughing.

“So, esteemed Ivanych,” Irina said as they finished dinner and began to pass around the honeycakes, “what did you find on your expedition? I assume you would have mentioned if there had been any hidden germ labs.”

The Ivanych pushed away the slice of cake being offered him. “No labs,” he said. “My paranoia was unfounded, I admit. You are not under attack. You Doukhobors simply have a habit of stumbling upon things better left buried. And by your arrogance, a boy was killed.”

The table went silent. The old cynic folded his napkin and cleared his throat.

“Ever since I realized what the symptoms were pointing to, I felt perplexed that an outbreak would happen here. When I accessed the old nets, I learned that this is not the first community in the north to uncover anthrax spores in the soil, awakened after decades or centuries in the permafrost. The others, however, were reindeer herders, in close contact with livestock that wander and graze in the dirt. But you Doukhobors keep no animals of any kind. How could you be so unlucky?

“One case, perhaps, could be blamed on chance. But the second outbreak, after ten years of peace, seemed like no coincidence. I assumed foul play, or some connection with the complex here. Even last night, I was prepared to trace Alyona’s steps to a secret bunker. But instead we just found an old, dead thing, made a menace by the dithering of our ancestors.

“Luka had found it too. He had never known a world with walls, so he was carefree in exploring deeper and deeper into the woods. When the crater opened, he explored that, and in the cave he was exposed. Perhaps he was digging up a sample of the fungi to take to his aunt. Then, with spores on his hands, perhaps he touched his mouth, as children sometimes do. Then he went home and died, and you blamed radiation, for the bomb was an easy target for your confusion. But not all of you, I suspect, believed this.”

He looked at Alyona now. She sat in her wheelchair stone-faced.

“Alyona also found the cave. How did you do it? Trace the samples Luka brought you into the forest? And, just like Luka, when you found the cave you could not resist digging up a few pieces of prehistoric mushroom. You breathed in the spores, and then you brought them back, tracking them into your lab, leaving a few under your fingernails. So reckless, I can hardly fathom it. But then, you dig through strange dirt every day. And you sit under a bomb and think about extinction. Were you feeling self-destructive? Tortured by guilt for having let your nephew die?”

“Ivanych!” Irina protested, standing up at the table. “This is a feast, not a courtroom!”

“She knew!” The Ivanych shouted. The Doukhobors at the other tables turned to watch the commotion. Maksim saw scared and hostile eyes, and he tensed, wondering if his master was wearing out their welcome. But the old man continued, turning back to Alyona.

“You knew. You know all about what lurks in the soil here. And yet you did nothing. Kept quiet, even when you yourself got sick. You let us all chase our tails fretting about radiation, when you knew the truth. Why, girl?”

“Because—” Alyona opened her mouth to speak, and instead began to cough. But after a couple hacks she caught her breath, and tried again. “Because people would get scared! Who would help me, if the dirt could kill them? Would they even stay? I could not take that chance. And, and my work has to keep going. I have to win!”

Everyone stared at them, the old sage and the young prodigy. The embers in the great ovens flickered a red light over the feast. Maksim looked up, but he could not see the moon.

“Win at what? Against whom?” The Ivanych demanded. “Splicing genes is not a game, girl.”

“No, it is a war,” Alyona said, fierce now, an edge in her voice that they had not heard before. She looked around at her community, who were watching her with a mix of anger and confusion. “A great war is coming. A war of trees. The Americans, the Chinese, they lob their seeds everywhere. Invasive pests that suck down carbon but choke out other life. They do not care what farms they ruin, what ecosystems they invade, so long as it slows the sinking of their precious coasts.

“So yes, I kept silent. And yes, I made mistakes. But the missile was a distraction, and I was glad to see it finally dealt with. In that silo, I will make us a great tree. One bigger than the other splicers can imagine, one that gives us huge fruit and strong wood. A tree to let us fight back! This land can feed us, feed a Russian people that can lead the world. But not if we are overrun by weed-oaks and new-bamboo. They would fallow us, but we will not be fallowed!”

“Pah!” The Ivanych began, but he was interrupted. Iashnoviditsa stood up and waved a hand for quiet. She looked pityingly at Alyona.

“Enough,” the leader said. “Enough.”


***


On Easter Sunday Maksim and The Ivanych packed their things and prepared to leave. They tidied up their little cottage and checked on their horses. Over the last century the Doukhobors had evolved a theology of animal liberation, but the horses had not been set loose. Instead they looked plump and lazy, having been doted on all week by a pack of Doukhobor teenagers.

After the previous night’s revelations, the commune was in a grim mood. When The Ivanych announced that they were leaving, there were no protests or offers of extended hospitality. They were thanked politely for their services and given packs of bread and fruit, mushrooms and hummus, to feed them on their ride back south.

Sokoloff was staying to fully examine the rocket. Maksim could not imagine the enthusiast ever prying himself away from the machine, but The Ivanych seemed to think he would get bored soon enough.

“That man will not be satisfied until he flings himself into the sky and never comes back,” The Ivanych said. “He is a fool. But, I suppose, he is a harmless kind of fool. I hope he gets there, one day.”

Morozov would escort the Doukhobors on their trip to Norilsk to dispose of the bomb. Maksim was surprised, given the shaman’s preference for the power-plant strategy.

“Whatever you are doing with nuclear materials,” Morozov said, as he shared a late breakfast with them, “it is better to not leave things half done.”

“And what do your spirits think of all that happened?” The Ivanych asked, needling him. “Perhaps the sickness in the soil was their doing, eh?”

Morozov was stoic. “Perhaps. I hope the settlers coming to this land hear about the anthrax. Maybe they will finally learn to keep to their cities, if the earth holds such dangers.”

Irina arrived then with an invitation from Iashnoviditsa. Maksim and the two sages met the leader in a secluded corner of the village, where neat little rows of gravestones poked up out of a riot of wildflowers.

Iashnoviditsa was standing at the far end of the cemetery. When they got close they saw that she was looking at the newest grave, Luka’s: a smooth, gray stone next to a small patch of bare dirt. She greeted them with a sad smile and asked them to hold out their palms. From a cloth bag she poured a little seed into each of their open hands.

“We used to leave eggs for our heavenbound,” she explained. “Pascha tradition. The wildflowers were my idea, actually, when I moved my people toward full veganism. Still, today I would like to think that young Luka would be happy knowing that his body will soon help grow something bright and colorful.”

She dumped a few seeds on the grave, and motioned for them to do the same. Morozov did so. Maksim followed, thinking of the boy whose death he had almost shared. But they had shared the cave too, and, for all the danger, he had seen a strangeness there that he would not forget.

“Will Alyona be punished?” The Ivanych asked, still fingering the seeds in his hand. “Exiled?”

Iashnoviditsa was surprised. “Punished? No. She is brilliant, but she is also young. She nearly died. I believe she feels the weight of her lies, or, at least, she will soon. Besides, we need her. We want nothing to do with any war, of trees or otherwise. But the weed-oaks and new-bamboo are indeed popping up more aggressively every year. We will have to fend them off if we are going to grow anything useful.”

The Ivanych looked like he wanted to object, but then he just shrugged and tossed his seeds onto Luka’s grave. He turned back to Iashnoviditsa.

“I figured out your secret. What you really are.”

“Oh? What am I then?” she replied.

“You are a spook.” The Ivanych grinned. “Like me.”

Iashnoviditsa played along, a glint of mischief in her eyes. “Is that so? When did you know?”

“I suspected the moment I first saw you. Or rather, the moment he first saw you,” he said, and gestured at Morozov, who was watching the banter impassively. “He was so startled to have recognized you, he could not keep it off his face. So I began to wonder, how might you have known each other, perhaps many decades ago? I thought to myself, they are both religious zealots, maybe that is the connection.

“But the more I watched you, the more I realized that neither of you are, in fact, particularly devout. Mikhail has his ideology, of course, but the mystic animism is secondary at best. And you, Iashnoviditsa, you did not pray before our meal. Nor do you compose yourself like someone who receives divine revelations in your dreams. Tell me, do your people notice when you quote Vissarion? Was that mad messiah the inspiration for this whole place you have built?”

The old woman did not respond. Her smile seemed more tired now. Then Morozov spoke, making Maksim start.

“I do remember you,” he said, his Godfather voice low. “From a conference in Petersburg, when I was in university. You gave a short speech about nuclear proliferation. They said you were with some government bureau. You used this phrase, ‘our irregular arsenal,’ and for some reason that always stuck in my mind.”

Iashnoviditsa sighed. “Yes, I remember that conference. We were trawling for Catholic agitators that might have slipped through our fingers. They had a way of finding out about facilities the state preferred to forget.”

The three men stared at her. Maksim’s mouth was open.

“Oh stop looking at me like that,” she said peevishly, for a moment dropping her ever-collected air. “I was as young and foolish as Alyona then. Few remember how chaotic events inside the government were during those years. The great president was gone, and the computationals had everyone scurrying around, chasing their grotesque obsessions. There was always another purge on the horizon, and I was not likely to survive it if they knew I was a Jesuit sympathizer.”

“Irina told us there are no records of this facility in Moscow,” The Ivanych said. “I assume that was your doing?”

Iashnoviditsa nodded. “I had been keeping a list. Obscure and secret sites from the Soviet days. As things finally unravelled in ‘41, I erased and burned all mention of them. We had no idea what the patriarchs were planning. I assumed most of our arsenal would get stolen and sold. Better these few, terrible places stay forgotten, I thought. Ironic, no? If I had just left alone, perhaps the beast here would have been dismantled decades ago.”

She looked down at Luka’s gravestone, then back across the cemetery at Feast of Passivity.

“Then I would never have brought them here. Luka might never have been born, nor died so young. Would that be better, I wonder?”

The Ivanych had no answer to this. Instead he asked, “What did you do after ‘41?”

“Oh, I lay low for a couple years. The computationals had a habit of sending minders to kill their former spies. When the anti-nuclear zealotry subsided, I realized too late that keeping those secrets had been a mistake. Still, while the Vatican forces had left, there was much energy in the youth, and all over the world there was a momentum towards reclaiming the landscapes we had treated so carelessly. So I found a place in that movement, helped guide it to some of the sites on my list, to turn them back into the ground.”

“The Foragers,” Maksim said. “You were a founder?”

“You saw the connection yourself, my boy,” The Ivanych said warmly. Then he turned back to Iashnoviditsa. “Why not bring them up here?”

“I tried,” she said. “It just never worked out. Last place left on my list...This site was too remote, not enough industrial detritus around to make it worth their while. And this facility was too big, and dealing with the nuke was too complicated. I needed more than a little band of reclaimers. These projects need a community, as brother Mikhail surely knows. So,” she waved her hand at the village, “here we are.”

“Pah!” The Ivanych scoffed. “The Foragers, the Doukhobors. Have you left any other cults in your wake?”

Iashnoviditsa laughed at this. Maksim wondered how long she had kept these secrets, and how good it felt to finally be found out. “What can I say? I grew up amongst Vissarionites, was indoctrinated by traveling Jesuits, and became a spook for the computationals. ‘Cults’ are just the kind of society where I feel at home.”

“Uniting the Doukhobors, becoming their leader, their visionary, bringing them across the world...How long did it take you?” Morozov asked.

“Twenty-five years,” she answered, looking tired again. “Not exactly my plan. But then, what in this life ever goes according to plan?”

“Well,” The Ivanych said. “Your work is nearly done. What are you going to do now?”

Iashnoviditsa pondered that for a moment, adjusting her headscarf. Maksim could hardly imagine the strange life this little old woman had led, the patience it had taken. Maksim knew that he would likely never again stand in the presence of such great wills as these three. Individuals made iron-hard by the catastrophes of the age.

“I suppose I will have to lead my people to reclaim Norilsk,” she said. “Trapping the beast down a mine shaft sounds good, but I would prefer to stay close enough to keep an eye on it, at least for a few generations. The ‘atomic priesthood’ you scoffed at does not sound so far fetched to me.”

Then she gave them a wry smile. “At least, that is my plan if you do not spill my secrets before you leave. I know how you feel about those, Villem.”

The Ivanych startled at hearing his name, but then he laughed. “Ha! Sokoloff must have told you, eh?”

“Must he have?” the old woman asked smugly.

“Pah! Fine. Keep your secrets and your pacifist cult. I hope you can also keep the beast buried. I hope it does not all unravel when you are no longer around.”

Then The Ivanych turned and began his slow walk back to the village. “Come, Maksim,” he called.

They fetched their horses and their bags and headed out into the wastes. The sun was high, and they stripped off their coats. Mosquitos bit at them as they passed the little crater ponds where they hatched. When they stopped for a late lunch, Maksim could not help but look back at the little village—small brown dots, still on the thin horizon.

“I will understand, Maksim, if you want to go back,” The Ivanych said suddenly.

Maksim thought about this. He did like it there. But then, he was not sure he was so good at keeping secrets, and he did not want to spoil things for the old woman. And then there was Alyona, with her harsh obsessions. He shook his head.

A little later they passed the sign, still standing there, offering up the empty land. But then, Maksim thought, it did not look so empty anymore. Odd little plants poked up out of the mud, offering their colorful flowers to the swarms of bugs. He wondered if any of them were new, or perhaps very, very old.

They picked up their pace. They had further to go before night fell. The hot day was already starting to cool.

The End
